---
title: "The SpollQ-SpolllAH complex of Clostridium difficile controls forespore engulfment and late stages of gene expression and spore morphogenesis"
date: 2019-07-06T15:27:17+06:00
draft: false
order: 4
# page title background image
bg_image: "images/backgrounds/page-title.jpg"
journal: "Molecular Microbiology"
year: "2016"
authors: "Mónica Serrano, Adam D. Crawshaw, Marcin Dembek, João M. Monteiro, Fátima C. Pereira, Mariana Gomes Pinho, Neil F. Fairweather, Paula S. Salgado, Adriano O. Henriques"
pub_url: "https://doi.org/10.1111/mmi.13311"
doi: "10.1111/mmi.13311"
pubmed: "26690930"
# meta description
description : "Molecular Microbiology, 2016"
# course thumbnail
image: "images/publications/QAH.jpg"
# type
type: "publication"
---


### Abstract

Engulfment of the forespore by the mother cell is a universal feature of endosporulation. In Bacillus subtilis, the forespore protein SpoIIQ and the mother cell protein SpoIIIAH form a channel, essential for endosporulation, through which the developing spore is
nurtured. The two proteins also form a backup system for engulfment. Unlike in B. subtilis, SpoIIQ of Clostridium difficile has intact LytM zinc-binding motifs. We show that spoIIQ or spoIIIAH deletion mutants of C. difficile result in anomalous engulfment, and that disruption of the SpoIIQ LytM domain via a single amino acid substitution (H120S) impairs engulfment differently. SpoIIQ and SpoIIQH120S interact with SpoIIIAH throughout engulfment. SpoIIQ, but not SpoIIQH120S, binds Zn21, and metal absence
alters the SpoIIQ-SpoIIIAH complex in vitro. Possibly, SpoIIQH120S supports normal engulfment in some cells but not a second function of the complex, required following engulfment completion. We show that cells of the spoIIQ or spoIIIAH mutants that complete engulfment are impaired in post-engulfment, forespore and mother cell-specific gene expression, suggesting a channel-like function. Both engulfment and a channel-like function may be ancestral functions of SpoIIQ-SpoIIIAH while the requirement for engulfment was alleviated through the emergence of redundant mechanisms in B. subtilis and related organisms.
